==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics
Electrophysiological and psychoacoustic
measures of amplitude modulation process-
ing
AUTHOR: Anders Søe
STUDY ID: s153045
SUPERVISORS:
Jens Hjortkær, Jonatan Märcher-Rørsted, and Sam
David Watson
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this study, a paradigm was developed to identify electrophysiological correlates of
behavioral amplitude modulation (AM) detection and discrimination. A 128 Hz ampli-
tude modulated broad-band noise stimulus that alternated at 2 Hz between a reference
and target AM depth was used to elicit cortical (2 Hz) and sub-cortical (128 Hz) enve-
lope following responses (EFRs) simultaneously, recorded with electroencephalography
(EEG). The same depth-alternating stimulus was used to measure behavioral AM detec-
tion and discrimination thresholds psychophysically. Thus, the 2 Hz alternation between
different degrees of AM depth was used to probe AM depth discrimination both at the
neural and behavioral level. 8 young (18-28 years) and 10 elderly (55-70 years) subjects
with normal hearing thresholds were tested in the study. Both EFRs and behavioral
thresholds were measured with either unmodulated or 40 % modulated reference stimuli.
It was found that increasing AM depth relative to the reference increased the EFRs
at both 2 Hz and 128 Hz. However, small depth differences failed to yield significant
EFRs in many subjects. For fully modulated stimuli alternating with an unmodulated
reference, EFR magnitudes at 2 Hz and at 128 Hz were correlated. Yet, only EFRs at
2 Hz, but not at 128 Hz, were significantly correlated with behavioral AM detection
thresholds. Thus, subjects that were behaviorally better able to detect the difference in
modulation depth had stronger cortical responses to AM depth differences. Elderly sub-
jects had significantly reduced 128 Hz EFRs for fully modulated stimuli. A significant
interaction between age and the rate of the EFR (2 Hz vs 128 Hz) was found, possi-
bly indicating a cortical gain mechanism that compensates for the reduced sub-cortical
AM coding. These results suggest that the considered paradigm is useful for detecting
cortical responses related to behavioral AM detection and discrimination tasks. The
results further support the idea of a central compensation of age-related decline in AM
processing.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jens Hjortkær, Jonatan Märcher-Rørsted, and
Sam David for putting remarkable effort into guidance and discussions throughout the
project. It has been encouraging working with you!
Thanks to Jonathan Regev for helpful discussions and Rikke Skovhøj Sørensen for help-
ing gather participants for the project.
I would also like to thank all participants for your contribution to the project. And
for your patience and endurance during the measurements.
Finally, I would like to thank DTU Electrical Engineering for providing access to all
necessary equipment for the project.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
List of Figures
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Electroencephalography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Amplitude modulation processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Envelope following responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
7
3.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Stimulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Electrophysiological experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Pilot measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results
15
4.1
Psychoacoustic AM detection and discrimination thresholds
. . . . . . .
15
4.2
SRT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
EEG measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Correlation of physiological and behavioral measures of AM coding
. . .
18
4.5
Examination of EFRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Discussion
23
5.1
Psychoacoustic experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
EEG measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Correlation of physiological and behavioral measures of AM coding
. . .
24
5.4
Examination of EFRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Conclusion
26
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iv
A Appendix
28
Bibliography
31
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1.1
Illustration of the EEG experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Illustration of the envelope power spectrum model by Ewert and Dau et al.
2000 [1]. In the left side the power spectrum of a sinusoid is seen. When
the sinusoid is multiplied with the broadband noise (the middle) in the time-
domain, the resulting envelope domain is seen to the right. Marked with blue
in the right side is the modulation-filter in which the power of the AM needs
to be higher than the power of the carrier to be detectable . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Illustration of how the ear transforms an amplitude modulated pure tone into
a neural response. In the left side the acoustical sound wave in seen. When
it reaches the inner ear and causes movements on the basilar membrane,
the outer hair cells amplifies these movements in a non-linear manner. The
movement of a point of the basilar membrane, which characteristic frequency
corresponds to the pure tone frequency, is seen in the middle. When the
signal is transformed a neural response, the signal is rectified. This is seen
in to the right in the figure. In the lower part of the figure the frequency
spectrum of each stage is shown. The figure is taken from Picton (2010) [2] .
6
3.1
Audiograms for the ipsilateral ear for the two groups. The shadow illustrates
the standard deviation across all participants in each group . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Visualization of the stimuli with the propagation between standard and tar-
get intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Visualization of stimuli for the psychoacoustic experiment
. . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Illustration of the oddballs included in the measurement. To the left is an
overview of the target depth of the oddballs.
The first three conditions
where ms = 0% seen to the left whereas the last three conditions where
ms = 40% seen to the right. The whiskers of the matching color of a condition
indicates the distribution of the oddball depths in that condition. The blue
line indicates the AM depth of the standard. To the right a visualization of
an oddball within condition 3 is seen. At first the target AM depth is 100 %.
At the onset of the oddball the target AM depth is decreased in two target
intervals. The subjects had to response to the oddball within 1.5 seconds to
get a hit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
vi
4.1
Thresholds found from the psychoacoustic experiment. The lines indicates
the mean of each group and the transparent markers illustrates the standard
deviation. The difference in the two groups where non-significant for all AM
standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
SRT’s measured for the two groups in the different conditions. The difference
in the two groups were non-significant for all the three SRT conditions [3] . .
16
4.3
SNR as function of AM depth of the target interval for 2 Hz and 128 Hz
EFRs. In the left column the standard intervals were ms = 0 % in the right
column the standard intervals were ms = 40 %. The transparent markers
illustrates the standard deviation for each group. The correlation coeﬀicient
and p-value for each plot is calculated upon all subjects . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Correlates of psychoacoustic thresholds and SNRs at 100 % target AM depth.
To the left, psychoacoustic thresholds at ms = 0 % is correlated with SNRs
of the EFRs from the EEG condition where ms = 0 % and the target AM
depth were of 100 %. To the right, psychoacoustic thresholds at ms = 40 % is
correlated with SNRs of the EFRs from the EEG condition where ms = 40 %
and the target AM depth were of 100 %. The blue points are elderly subjects
whereas the young adults are marked with red. The dotted lines indicates
the 95 % confidence interval for the predicted value of the linear regressions
19
4.5
Violin plot of the 2 Hz, 128 Hz and 4 Hz EFRs at ms = 0 % for the young
adults and elderly group. The significance bars between the EFR groups
indicates statistical significance of the interaction between age and EFR rate
while the significance bars within each rate indicates the statistical signifi-
cance between age groups for that rate. ∗∗= p < 0.01 [3] . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
Correlates between the 2 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (left), and between the
4 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (right). The blue points are elderly subjects
whereas the young adults are marked with red. The dotted lines indicates
the 95 % confidence interval for the predicted value of the linear regressions.
In the left plot, the r and p values is shown for individual correlates of the
two groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
A.1 Scatter plot of the behavioral thresholds and SRTs. The lines indicates linear
regressions. Thresh0 is the behavioral threshold at ms = 0 %, Thresh20 at
ms = 20 % and so forth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
A.2 Psychometric functions fitted to the mean of the hit rate of the oddballs
for each condition. The blue lines indicates the mean of the elderly group
whereas the red lines indicates the mean of the young adults. The transparent
markers illustrates the standard deviation for each group. The top row shows
the conditions where ms = 0 % and the bottom row where ms = 40 %
. . .
29
A.3 Topography of the mean 2 Hz EFR at condition 3 (ms = 0 %, mtot = 100 %)
for elderly and young adults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
A.4 Topography of the mean 128 Hz EFR at condition 3 (ms = 0 %, mtot = 100 %)
for elderly and young adults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Elderly people often experience diﬀiculties hearing speech in noisy environments, despite
having clinically normal audiograms [4] [5]. This could possibly be due to supra-threshold
temporal processing deficits [6]. Speech perception relies critically on the processing of
amplitude modulations [7] [8], and deficits in the coding of AM with age may compro-
mise speech understanding [9] [10]. It is therefore critical to investigate AM detection
and discrimination, how this is affected by age, and how AM processing predict speech
comprehension. AM detection and discrimination have been extensively studied behav-
iorally [11] [12], but objective neural correlates of AM perception are missing. Hence,
our understanding of the mechanisms in the neural system in relation to changes in AM
perception is lacking. It is therefore interesting to further investigate this relation, and
potentially find an objective diagnostic of supra-threshold temporal processing deficits.
In this project, an electrophysiological measure of AM processing was developed
with the aim to identify objective correlates to psychoacoustic AM detection and dis-
crimination thresholds. Particularly, envelope-following responses (EFRs) to amplitude
modulated noise at different rates were considered. The EFR in response to fast AM
rates measure earlier stages of sub-cortical processing [13], while EFRs to slower rate
AM are dominated by activity at later cortical stages [14] [15] [16].
We know that age has neural consequences, and it has been found that auditory
nerve fibers (ANFs) degenerates with age [17] [18]. Degeneration of ANFs, or cochlear
neuropathy, could possibly lead to supra-threshold deficits in AM processing [19] [20].
In non-human mammal studies it has been shown that synapses of the inner hair cells
can be divided into those that synapse onto high threshold and low threshold ANFs [21].
It is suggested that low-threshold nerve fibers degenerate prior to high-threshold fibers
when the ear is exposed to noise or ages [22] [23]. If this is the case for humans, those
afflicted by cochlear neuropathy may preserve relatively normal pure-tone thresholds,
and yet have worse neural encoding supra-threshold, and therefore perform worse in
AM detection and discrimination tasks.
In this study, we therefore consider elderly
people at age>55 years with NH pure-tone thresholds as possible cochlear neuropathy
patients. A group of young adults (age mean = 22 years) was used as a control group.
In psychoacoustic tasks it has earlier been shown, that elderly people with NH pure-
tone thresholds perform worse in AM discrimination tasks at an AM rate of 128 Hz [24],
both using pure tone and wide-band noise carriers. It has also been found the hearing
impaired listeners obtain lower thresholds for AM detection [11]. Hence it it interesting
to investigate the relation between AM detection and discrimination.
Using amplitude modulated signals, neural responses to AM at this rate can be
measured as an EFR electrophysiologically and is thought to come from the brainstem
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
2
(sub-cortical), whereas slower rates (< 20 Hz) is thought to primarily originate from the
auditory cortex [16]. A paradigm to test both sub-cortical and cortical EFRs simulta-
neously was designed in this project. With an amplitude modulated broad-band noise
as carrier, a slow alternation rate of 2 Hz between reference intervals and intervals of
increased modulation depth were used to identify cortical responses that might be di-
rectly compared to psychoacoustic thresholds, while at the same time resolving the fast
modulation rate of 128 Hz from sub-cortical measures. An illustration of the paradigm
is shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the EEG experiment.
The same stimuli were also examined in a separate psychoacoustic paradigm. The
threshold of the increased target was measured for various reference AM depths. It was
expected that the elderly group obtained higher thresholds for both the AM detection
and discrimination tasks due to age-related degeneration of ANFs.
As the 2 Hz alternation rate is perceived exclusively above the behavioral AM thresh-
old, it’s reasonable to assume that the EFR to the alternation rate can only be measured
above this threshold. Hence we assume that there is a relation between the threshold of
the psychoacoustic experiment and the strength of the 2 Hz component in the EFR. At
a fixed value of the AM depth in the target intervals, the perception of the alternation
will be obvious for some subjects, whereas it may be perceived as a stationary signal for
others. Therefore it is expected that the amplitude of the 2 Hz component in the EFR,
in response to a fixed target AM depth, reflects the threshold of similar psychoacoustic
AM detection and AM discrimination tasks. This might be more apparent when the
target is at high AM depths where the alternation rate is more salient, as the magnitude
of the EFR for these depths should grow.
Decision mechanisms underlying auditory object identification resides in the auditory
cortex [25]. Hence, the 2 Hz EFR, which is primarily measured from the auditory cortex
[16], might be directly compared with the ability to distinguish the 2 Hz alternation in
a psychoacoustic experiment. Specifically we expect the elderly group to obtain lower
magnitudes for the cortical slow-rate EFRs compared to the group of young adults.
To quantify the speech comprehension of the subjects used in the study, speech
reception thresholds (SRTs) were measured in stationary- and in amplitude-modulated
noise. It has earlier been shown that elderly people of NH have worse speech perception
compared to young NH people in both stationary noise and amplitude modulated noise
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
3
[26]. Manju et al. 2014 [27] found a correlation between EFRs and SRTs in the presence
of noise. Syllable rates are in the order of 3-6 Hz [28]. Perception of speech might
therefore be comparable with the 2 Hz alternation rate. It is expected that the ability to
detect AM detection and AM discrimination is correlated with SRTs, such that the SRTs
are lower when the AM detection and discrimination thresholds are lower. Similarly, it
is expected that a low SRT will promote a greater cortical EFRs to slow AM.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This section serves as a brief introduction to some of the concepts used or investigated
in this master thesis.
2.1
Electroencephalography
It is suggested that the human brain consists of around eighty-six billion neurons [29].
These neurons create individual electric potential spikes, which are often synchronous
within larger groups of other neurons. The summed potential of multiple neurons re-
sponding to a stimulus can create an electrical response measurable from the scalp with
the use of electrodes, which are connected with electrical conducting gel. This type
of measurement is known as electroencephalography (EEG). The spacial resolution of
EEG is in the order of centimeters [30], while the temporal resolution is great, depend-
ing on the sample rate used to record the potentials from the electrodes. Due to the
high temporal resolution, it is very useful to obtain neural responses to sound with
EEG. Responses to steady-state signals are easily measured with EEG as they can be
averaged over time, which yields a higher SNR. Such responses are known as auditory
steady-state responses. Among them are frequency following responses (FFRs) and en-
velope following responses (EFRs), which are useful for determining temporal processing
characteristics of the auditory system.
2.2
Amplitude modulation processing
The auditory system is complex and codes information in sound such as frequency infor-
mation, spatial information and temporal information. The focus of this thesis is tem-
poral information which is an important factor in the perception of speech [8], among
others. The coding of temporal information in the auditory system is referred to as
temporal processing.
The temporal processing ability of the auditory system can be measured in different
ways. One of the classical methods is to apply amplitude modulation to a carrier signal
and find the threshold in AM depth of when the AM can be identified. The frequency
of the AM and the type of carrier signal can make great differences in how easily AM is
recognised.
==PAGE:12==
2.3 Envelope following responses
5
Typical choices of carrier signals are sinusoids, narrow-band noise, broad-band noise
or speech-shaped noise. Broad-band noise, which is used in this study, contains a lot
of inherent fluctuations, which leaks into the envelope spectrum. The envelope power
spectrum model introduced by Ewert and Dau et al. 2000 [1] suggests that the temporal
processing highly depends on the envelope spectrum of the carrier signal. An illustration
of the model can be seen in Figure 2.1. In particular they suggest that the ratio between
the envelope power of the carrier signal and the envelope power applied by the AM
within a modulation-filter can be used to predict the AM depth threshold. Thus, the
task is to identify the envelope of the AM in the presence of inherent fluctuations from
the wide-band noise carrier itself.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the envelope power spectrum model by Ewert and Dau et al.
2000 [1]. In the left side the power spectrum of a sinusoid is seen. When
the sinusoid is multiplied with the broadband noise (the middle) in the
time-domain, the resulting envelope domain is seen to the right. Marked
with blue in the right side is the modulation-filter in which the power of
the AM needs to be higher than the power of the carrier to be detectable.
2.3
Envelope following responses
When the ear is exposed to sound, movements will occur in the basilar membrane.
Located on top of the basilar membrane is the organ of corti which consists of around
3500 inner hair cells and 12000 outer hair cells.
The outer hair cells amplifies the
movements of the basilar membrane non-linearly as shown in Figure 2.2 (Compression).
The inner hair cells are sensory cells, which synapse onto auditory nerve fibers (ANFs),
which transmits electrical pulses through the ascending auditory pathway to the auditory
cortex. When movements occur on the basilar membrane, the inner hair cells of the
organ of corti will bend back and forth, and this will trigger the inner hair cells to send
electrical impulses through the auditory nerve (AN). This step is shown in Figure 2.2
as rectification. The rectification makes the envelope rate detectable in the frequency
spectrum of the neural response to the signal. The neural response to the envelope
is called the envelope following response (EFR). In the auditory pathway, when many
neurons synchronize their discharge, an electrical field strong enough to measure with
EEG is evoked.
An amplitude modulated signal can be used to measure the EFR.
Measured EFRs to slow modulation frequencies (< 20 Hz) will primarily originate from
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Envelope following responses
6
cortical regions (auditory cortex), as it is closer to the scalp [16], while higher modulation
frequencies (> 32 Hz) will originate from sub-cortical regions (brainstem) [31]. Hence
a way to distinguish EFRs from the cortical and sub-cortical regions is by modulation
at low frequencies beneath 20 Hz or high frequencies above 32 Hz. EFRs in the cortical
region are highly affected by attention, as listening actively to stimulus a significantly
higher EFR is evoked [32].
Figure 2.2: Illustration of how the ear transforms an amplitude modulated pure tone
into a neural response. In the left side the acoustical sound wave in seen.
When it reaches the inner ear and causes movements on the basilar mem-
brane, the outer hair cells amplifies these movements in a non-linear man-
ner. The movement of a point of the basilar membrane, which characteris-
tic frequency corresponds to the pure tone frequency, is seen in the middle.
When the signal is transformed a neural response, the signal is rectified.
This is seen in to the right in the figure. In the lower part of the figure
the frequency spectrum of each stage is shown. The figure is taken from
Picton (2010) [2].
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
Subjects
A total of 19 subjects were tested. Eight (5 female) which were relatively young subjects,
with ages ranging from 18 to 28 years (mean was 22 years), and eleven (6 female) which
were elderly, ranging in age from 55 to 70 years (mean was 61 years). All subjects were
of NH with a maximum pure tone threshold of 20 dB HL from 0.125-4 kHz. Two of
the elderly subjects had hearing thresholds at respectively 25- and 35 dB HL at 4 kHz.
The subject who had a pure tone threshold of 35 dB HL at 4 kHz was considered an
outlier and hence not included in further analysis. Pure tone audiometry was run using
an Interacoustics AC40 clinical audiometer and Sennheiser HDA200s headphones for
125 Hz and all octaves up to 8 kHz. All subjects were danish natives except for one
elderly subject, who was excluded from the analysis of speech perception. Five out of
ten in the elderly group were musicians, while none in the young group were musicians.
The audiograms of the two groups can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Audiograms for the ipsilateral ear for the two groups. The shadow illus-
trates the standard deviation across all participants in each group.
3.2
Stimulus
The stimulus used in the experiments was an amplitude modulated broadband noise
carrier, which alternated between a standard interval at an AM depth, ms, and a target
interval which was modulated at a higher AM depth ms + minc. A half-wave rectified
==PAGE:15==
3.2 Stimulus
8
modulator was used, as it was found to evoke stronger EFRs in preliminary measure-
ments. The stimuli is inspired by Ewert and Dau et al. 2004 [33], who measured AM
discrimination thresholds using a 3-AFC procedure. The alternation rate between the
two intervals was 2 Hz (two of each in a second). Each interval of the stimuli s(t), can
be described by the equation
s(t) = (mtot · max{sin(2πfmt), 0} + 1 −mtot) c(t)
(3.1)
where mtot = ms + minc and t is time. In each standard interval minc = 0. c(t)
represents the carrier signal, which was a broad-band white-noise carrier with a pass-
band of 500-4000 Hz. A broadband noise was used as it evokes a greater EFR [34]
[35]. It was created using the normal distributed random number generator in Matlab
which had random seed each time a signal for any condition for any subject were made.
This avoided frozen noise effects. An 8th order butterworth high-pass and an 8th order
butterworth low-pass was used to filter the AM stimuli. The modulation frequency, fm,
was set to 128 Hz. All intervals were normalised with its RMS, whereafter the combined
stimuli was calibrated to an RMS level of 80 dB SPL for all experiments. The waveform
of the stimuli alternating between the standard AM depth and the target can be seen
in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Visualization of the stimuli with the propagation between standard and
target intervals.
3.2.1
Psychoacoustic experiments
3.2.2
AM detection/discrimination
For the psychoacoustic experiment, five alternations of the stimuli were put together to
create a single interval. Three of these intervals were made, with two of them being
references, only containing standard intervals, and one of them being the target interval,
alternating between the standard and the target intervals at a rate of 2 Hz. In the target
interval of the psychoacoustic experiment, the signal would start and end on a reference
interval. An example of the intervals can be seen in Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:16==
3.2 Stimulus
9
Figure 3.3: Visualization of stimuli for the psychoacoustic experiment.
The subjects were presented with the three intervals of duration = 1.25 s in random
order with a gap of 0.5 s silence between. The task of the subject was to identify the
target interval, which contained a larger AM depth, as seen in the second interval of
Figure 3.3. The threshold of when the target interval could be detected was found for
standard AM depths of 0-, 20-, 40-, 50-, 60- and 70 %. The standard AM depth refers
to the depth of the reference intervals as well as the standard intervals inside the target
interval. A three-alternative forced choice paradigm with 2-down/1-up procedure was
used to find the 71% correct point on the psychometric function for each of the standard
AM depths [36]. The initial step-size was 4 %. After every two reversals it was halved,
until it reached 1 %. A 50 ms sine-ramp was used in the beginning and in the end of each
waveform. The subjects received visual feedback on whether the response was correct
or incorrect. The subjects performed the task for each standard in random order. To
familiarize the subjects with the task prior to the experiment, each subject performed
test-rounds at the 0 % (unmodulated) standard, until the result converged towards a
stable threshold. In that way it was certain that the subjects understood the experiment.
The headphones used for the experiment were Sennheiser HD 580 headphones, calibrated
to an RMS level of 80 dB SPL. For each subject, only one ear was stimulated. The right
ear was prioritised for all subjects, but the left ear was chosen for one young and two
elderly subjects as their right ear had either pure tone thresholds above 20 dB-HL in
the range of 500 - 4000 Hz or if much earwax in the ear canal was observed.
3.2.3
SRT
A hearing-in-noise-test (HINT) in danish [37] was carried out in order to estimate the
speech recognition threshold (SRT) for each subject. The SRT was found for two maskers;
One masker was a stationary broadband white-noise masker with a pass-band of 500-
4000 Hz, similar to the carrier signal of the earlier described stimuli. The second masker
was identical to the first masker but amplitude modulated at a depth of 100 % by a
4 Hz sinusoidal modulator. Each masker was calibrated to an RMS level of 80 dB SPL.
The subjects were first presented with a list of 20 sentences in the stationary noise as a
training round. Thereafter the subjects were presented with two lists of 20 sentences for
each of the maskers, starting with two lists for the stationary noise followed by two lists
for the amplitude modulated noise. For each condition the mean SRT was found. A
==PAGE:17==
3.3 Electrophysiological experiment
10
masking release SRT was found by extracting the SRT of the modulated noise condition
from the SRT of the stationary noise condition (in dB).
3.3
Electrophysiological experiment
3.3.1
Stimuli
For the electrophysiological experiment, six conditions of the stimuli were made. Three
in which the standard intervals were of 0 % AM depth and three of which the standard
were of 40 % AM depth which corresponds to approximately -8 dB. For the conditions
of 0 % standard modulation, the targets were of 50 %, 70 % and 100 % AM depth. For
the conditions of 40 % standard modulation, the targets were of 60 %, 80 % and 100 %
AM depth. Each of the six stimulus conditions lasted 4 minutes.
3.3.2
Oddballs
Preliminary measurements suggested that the EFR magnitudes may depend on the
subject’s attention. This was observed by presenting the same stimulus while either
watching a movie or listening actively to the stimulus. In one pilot experiment, the
magnitude for both the alternation rate and the 128 Hz AM rate were respectively
4 dB and 8 dB stronger when listening actively to the stimuli. Hence, it was decided
to include an oddball detection task in the experiment in order to ensure that the
subjects attended the stimuli. The oddballs were chosen to be changes in the target AM
depth of two subsequent target intervals. The task was to push a button whenever the
subject heard a change in the ongoing stimuli. The response window for the oddball
detection was 1.5 seconds from the onset of the oddball. The oddballs were presented
on average each 15 seconds, but each oddball was presented randomly in an interval of
± 2.5 s. This made a total of 16 oddballs, which were presented three times for each
condition. The target AM depth, minc, of each oddball was randomly chosen from a
linearly spaced uniform distribution over an interval, in an attempt to make the task
approximately equally diﬀicult for each condition. This also allowed a behavioral readout
of AM detection or discrimination performance during the EEG experiment. The target
AM depths for each condition can be seen in the table below:
A psychometric function was fitted to the mean of the hit rate of the oddballs for each
condition. The EEG data recorded while the oddballs were presented is not included
in the EEG analysis. The resulting psychometric functions can be seen in the appendix
Figure A.2. Before starting the data collection, the subjects were introduced to the
paradigm in a test round, where they were told to detect the oddballs of condition 1 & 3.
When their response were stable for the ’easier’ oddballs in both conditions, they went
on with the actual experiment. The oddballs were presented each 4 seconds on average
in the test round, to obtain training for the experiment faster.
==PAGE:18==
3.3 Electrophysiological experiment
11
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the oddballs included in the measurement. To the left is an
overview of the target depth of the oddballs. The first three conditions
where ms = 0% seen to the left whereas the last three conditions where
ms = 40% seen to the right.
The whiskers of the matching color of a
condition indicates the distribution of the oddball depths in that condition.
The blue line indicates the AM depth of the standard. To the right a
visualization of an oddball within condition 3 is seen. At first the target
AM depth is 100 %. At the onset of the oddball the target AM depth
is decreased in two target intervals. The subjects had to response to the
oddball within 1.5 seconds to get a hit.
3.3.3
Setup and procedure
For the EEG recording a BioSemi ActiveTwo AD-box was used to capture the signals
at a 2048 Hz sample rate. For each of the six conditions, a different trigger value was
sent at each target interval, such that a trigger was sent at a rate of 2 Hz. A 32 channel
BioSemi layout was used in addition to four external electrodes which were mounted on
the left- and right mastoids, and below and above the right eye. The subjects were seated
in a soundproof room with a screen in front of them, to provide visual feedback whether
they had a correct or incorrect response to an oddball. All conditions of the stimuli were
repeated three times, each time in random order, so that a total of 12 minutes of data
was collected for each condition. Between each condition the subject had a break to
stretch, after which the subject choose when to continue with the next condition. The
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Electrophysiological experiment
12
same ear as the one tested in the psychoacoustic experiment were tested in experiment.
The stimulus were presented using Etymotic Research ER-3A insert earphones.
3.3.4
Post-processing
The data post-processing was done in Matlab R2020a.
Using the Fieldtrip toolbox
[38] the recordings from each condition were divided into epochs of 1024 data points
corresponding to 0.5 seconds, and the 50 Hz line-noise was removed with the dftfilter in
Fieldtrip. Then two different filters were applied for the analysis of the 2- and 4 Hz rates,
and the analysis of the of 128 Hz rate. For the slow rates a band pass FIR filter was made
in Matlab with pass band from 1-40 Hz and stop bands at 0.2- and 60 Hz. For the fast
rate the pass band was set from 80-200 Hz and stop bands at 40- and 400 Hz. For both
filters the attenuation at the stop band was set to 60 dB and the pass band ripple to a
maximum of 0.1 dB. The recordings were convolved with the filters in both directions
using Matlab’s filtfilt() to achieve zero phase filtering and get a squared attenuation
(double in dB). After filtering, the slow rate filtered recordings were down sampled to
a sample rate of 128 Hz and the fast rate filtered recordings to 512 Hz. After that the
eye blink artifacts were removed using the nt_eyeblink function from the NoiseTools
toolbox [39], with the two external eye electrodes as input. The component of highest
variance was removed. To achieve a better SNR, each epoch for each channel was then
normalized by their variance, and the mean variance for each channel were multiplied to
each epoch, to keep the summed variance for each channel intact, as protocol 2 of (John
et al. 2001 [40]). For the fast rate filtered signals, the first 128 samples from each epoch
was extracted, to keep only the data from the target intervals, of increased AM depth,
for each condition. Finally, each 32 consecutive epochs were grouped into segments of
respectively 16 s for the slow rates and 8 s for the fast rate.
To obtain the SNR for 2 Hz, 4 Hz, and 128 Hz EFRs, all 42 segments were averaged
for each channel in the time domain after which it was transformed into the fourier
domain using a fast fourier transform. In the fourier domain, the magnitudes of the
AF3, F3, Fz, FC2 and F4 channels were averaged for the 2 Hz and 4 Hz EFRs. For the
128 Hz EFRs the magnitudes of Fz, FC1, Cz, and CP1 were averaged. Channel selection
was based upon the highest mean SNR of each channel across all subjects. Topographies
can be found in the appendix A. For the 2- and 4 Hz rates, the surrounding ± 0.99 Hz
bins were used as noise floor for the SNR, corresponding to the 30 surrounding bins. For
the 128 Hz SNR the noise floor set to the mean of the surrounding ± 10 Hz bins with
all the bins divisible by 2 Hz removed, to avoid inter-modulation distortion products in
the noise floor, corresponding to the surrounding 150 bins.
==PAGE:20==
3.4 Pilot measurements
13
3.4
Pilot measurements
3.4.0.1
Behavioral piloting
The first behavioral measurements were carried out using the method described by Ewert
and Dau et al.
2004 [33].
The experiment were similar to the psychoacoustic AM
experiment of this thesis, but no alternation between reference and target depths were
used. Instead two reference intervals and one target interval was presented. Results
similar to that of Ewert and Dau was found and used as a reference for future results. By
applying the alternating paradigm, the pattern of discrimination thresholds as function
of reference depth was preserved, but all thresholds were elevated. Different alternating
rates were investigated, and it was found that higher alternation rates led to elevated
thresholds. When presenting the stimuli to only one ear, further elevation of thresholds
were found. When the width of the broad band carrier was wider, the thresholds were
reduced, which complies with the envelope power spectrum model [33]. Different AM
frequencies were tested in the range of 50-250 Hz. It was found that lower rates led
to a lower thresholds. The rectified amplitude modulator was primarily used due to
stronger EFRs. Behaviorally it led to slightly lower thresholds. When the stimulus
properties were chosen, an uncalibrated behavioral experiment was run on 10 subjects
to find the standard AM depths most beneficial for finding temporal AM processing
differences in young and elderly NH subjects. Thresholds of the detection (unmodulated
reference) condition and 40 % modulated reference condition showed biggest differences
between the two groups, and hence these two standard depths were used for the final
EEG experiment.
3.4.0.2
EEG piloting
Concurrently with the behavioral piloting, EFRs to different stimulus properties were
investigated. The target AM depth of all pilot tests were of 100 % except for when
oddballs were tested. EFRs to alternation rates of 1, 1.6, 2, 2.56 and 3.2 Hz were tested.
Rates of 1 Hz and 1.6 Hz evoked weaker SNRs for the EFRs. Due to results of the
behavioral pilots, the 2 Hz rate was chosen, as the discrimination threshold was not
measurable for some subjects at the highest standard AM depth (ms = 70%). Fast AM
rates of 40 Hz, 128 Hz and 256 Hz all evoked similar SNRs for the EFRs. Attention
effects were found for 40 Hz and 128 Hz as reported in subsection 3.3.2 and oddballs
were therefore included in the experiment. An increase of SNR in the EFR to the 2 Hz
rate was found for the 128 Hz fast AM compared to the 40 Hz fast AM. Besides this it
was found that the EFR to the alternation rate decreased as the standard AM depth
was increased.
In order to better distinguish the sub-cortical and cortical EFRs, an AM rate of
128 Hz was chosen [31]. Another argument to select this rate was that Regev et al. 2020
[24] found a difference between thresholds for young and elderly NH subjects for 128 Hz,
when conducting a measurement similar to that of Ewert and Dau et al. 2004 [33].
==PAGE:21==
3.5 Statistics
14
3.5
Statistics
Statistical tests were conducted in MATLAB. 2-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) were
performed to check for significant differences and interaction effects using anovan(). Post
hoc analysis were performed using multcompare() and Bonferroni corrected for multiple
comparisons. For comparison of measures corr() was used to find Pearsons r coeﬀicient
as well as the probability p. A significance level of 95 % was used for these measures.
F-tests where used to find the limit of which the SNRs of the EFRs were significant,
according to the method described by Dobie et al. 1996 [41]. The chosen statistical
significance were 99 % which with the chosen amount of surrounding bins yields an SNR
of 6 dB for the 2 Hz and 4 Hz EFRs and 5.65 dB for the 128 Hz EFR.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Psychoacoustic AM detection and
discrimination thresholds
AM detection and discrimination thresholds were measured in a psychoacoustic experi-
ment. The thresholds of the young adult and the elderly group is shown in Figure 4.1.
The target AM depth on the y-axis shows how much the AM depth was increased as func-
tion of the AM depth of the standard intervals. ms = 0 % corresponds to AM detection.
The difference between the young adults (red) and elderly (blue), were non-significant
for all the standard AM depths in a 2 way ANOVA (F1(1,96) = 2.6, p = 0.11).
Figure 4.1: Thresholds found from the psychoacoustic experiment. The lines indicates
the mean of each group and the transparent markers illustrates the stan-
dard deviation. The difference in the two groups where non-significant for
all AM standards.
Although we did not find any significant difference between the young adults and
the elderly group, we do observe large individual differences within the two groups. In
general a high variance is observed for all standard depths. One could argue that subjects
having thresholds beneath a target AM depth of 40 % for AM detection (ms = 0%) is
perceiving the behavioral task at ms = 40% as a detection task and hence achieve a
lower threshold at ms = 40%. However, a correlation between thresholds at ms = 0%
and ms = 40% revealed that this was not the case (r = 0.30, p = 0.23).
==PAGE:23==
4.2 SRT
16
4.2
SRT
AM processing may influence speech comprehension in absence of fluctuating noise.
Hence SRTs were measured in stationary and amplitude modulated noise. It hypothe-
sized that SRTs for elderly people are higher than for young adults. The SRT for both
groups can be seen in Figure 4.2. A two-way ANOVA revealed that there was no effect
of age for SRTs in stationary and modulated noise (F(1,32) = 1.25, p = 0.27) as well as no
interaction effect (F(1,32) = 0.12, p = 0.73). It implies that both groups benefited equally
from the 4 Hz AM (i.e. no effect of age on masking release). A scatter plot of the SRTs
and the behavioral thresholds can be seen in the appendix in Figure A.1.
Figure 4.2: SRT’s measured for the two groups in the different conditions. The differ-
ence in the two groups were non-significant for all the three SRT conditions
[3].
4.3
EEG measures
To get a physiological measure of the AM coding, we measured the EFRs as function of
AM depth when the standard intervals were 0 % and 40 % AM depth. The SNR of the
EFR measures as a function of AM depth is shown in Figure 4.3. It was expected to see a
growth of the EFR magnitudes as function of the target AM depth. Correlates between
the mean SNR of the EFRs and their corresponding target AM depth showed that the
growth was significant for both the 2 Hz and 128 Hz EFR (r = 0.4, p = 0.00028 and
r = 0.34, p = 0.012), when the AM depth of the standard intervals were of ms = 0 %.
For the elderly group, the 128 Hz EFR saturated at a target AM depth of 70 % for
ms = 0 %. For ms = 40 % it was found that the growth of the 2 Hz EFR was highest
and most significant (r = 0.56, p = 1.2e −5) but that the growth of the 128 Hz EFR
for this standard was non-significant (r = 0.11, p = 0.42). This was also found when
the group of young adults were analysed separately.
==PAGE:24==
4.3 EEG measures
17
Figure 4.3: SNR as function of AM depth of the target interval for 2 Hz and 128 Hz
EFRs. In the left column the standard intervals were ms = 0 % in the
right column the standard intervals were ms = 40 %. The transparent
markers illustrates the standard deviation for each group. The correlation
coeﬀicient and p-value for each plot is calculated upon all subjects.
We found that both amplitudes and SNRs varies strongly across individuals both
for young adults and elderly subjects.
The SNR of the EFR rates were tested in
a two-way ANOVA to check for interaction effects between the age group and EFR
frequency.
For ms = 0 % significant differences was found between the young and
elderly group (F(1,32)
=
6.78, p
=
0.0139), the 2 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR
(F(1,32) = 10.64, p = 0.0026), as well as a significant interaction effect between age
and EFR rate (F(1,32) = 8.06, p = 0.0078). The interaction indicates that the SNR
difference for the two EFR rates was higher for the young adults compared to the elderly.
A post hoc test showed that there was no effect of age on the 2 Hz EFR (p = 1), but
a significant effect of age for the 128 Hz EFR (p = 0.0032). For the 128 Hz EFR at a
target AM depth of 100 % and ms = 0 % the mean difference between the two groups
was 10.7 dB.
Similarly, these measures were significantly different at ms = 40 %.
Significant
differences between the young and elderly group (F(1,32) = 5.42, p = 0.0263), the 2 Hz
EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (F(1,32) = 5.59, p = 0.0243), as well as an interaction effect
between age and EFR rate (F(1,32) = 4.88, p = 0.0344) was found. Again a post hoc
test showed that there was no effect of age on the 2 Hz EFR (p = 1), but a significant
==PAGE:25==
4.4 Correlation of physiological and behavioral measures of AM coding
18
effect of age for the 128 Hz EFR (p = 0.0262). A correlation between the 128 Hz EFR
at standard depths of ms = 0 % and ms = 40 % was made, both at the 100 % target
AM depth condition. The results were r = 0.9067 and p = 2e-07, indicating that the
AM coding of the brainstem does not change between the detection and discrimination
conditions.
At a standard AM depth of 0 % and a target AM depth of 50 %, the percentage of
significant 128 Hz EFRs was 42 %. Nevertheless, only 21 % significant responses were
obtained for the 2 Hz EFR. This indicates that even when the 128 Hz EFR is measured
at the brainstem, the cortical response to the difference between the stationary- and
amplitude modulated intervals is not necessarily strong.
4.4
Correlation of physiological and
behavioral measures of AM coding
It was hypothesized that the 2 Hz EFRs, in response to a fixed target AM depth, would
correlate with the psychoacoustic thresholds in the AM detection or discrimination tasks.
Since no effect of age were found in the behavioral thresholds, all subjects were included
in the correlates between EFRs and psychoacoustic thresholds. As can be seen in Fig-
ure 4.3, most significant responses were recorded at an AM depths of 100 %. Hence,
only EFRs at this target AM depth were correlated with the behavioral thresholds. A
weakness of correlating the EFRs captured at a target AM depth of 100 % with the
psychoacoustic thresholds, is that the mean target AM depths of the psychoacoustic
thresholds were 39.5 % and 55 % for ms = 0 % and ms = 40 % respectively. Hence,
there is a big difference in the target AM depth of the EFR and psychoacoustic thresh-
olds. A significant SNR of the 2 Hz EFRs was not achieved in most cases, and hence all
measures with SNRs above 2 dB is included in the further analysis. With the number of
surrounding bins used, SNRs above 2 dB have a statistical significance of about 92 %.
==PAGE:26==
4.4 Correlation of physiological and behavioral measures of AM coding
19
Figure 4.4: Correlates of psychoacoustic thresholds and SNRs at 100 % target AM
depth. To the left, psychoacoustic thresholds at ms = 0 % is correlated
with SNRs of the EFRs from the EEG condition where ms = 0 % and the
target AM depth were of 100 %. To the right, psychoacoustic thresholds at
ms = 40 % is correlated with SNRs of the EFRs from the EEG condition
where ms = 40 % and the target AM depth were of 100 %. The blue points
are elderly subjects whereas the young adults are marked with red. The
dotted lines indicates the 95 % confidence interval for the predicted value
of the linear regressions.
Correlates of EFRs and psychoacoustic thresholds can be seen in Figure 4.4. For
the AM stimulus with ms = 0 % (unmodulated) standard depth, a moderate negative
correlation between the 2 Hz EFR and the psychoacoustic thresholds was found (top left)
(r = −0.48, p = 0.045). When the SNR of the 2 Hz EFR is higher, the AM detection
threshold is lower, as hypothesized. This means that subjects who are better able to
discriminate the AM depths have stronger EFRs to the difference in AM depth, although
measured above the psychoacoustic threshold. The same pattern is seen for the 128 Hz
SNR when ms = 0 % (r = −0.39, p = 0.12), although it is not significant.
For the ms = 40 % standard AM depth (corresponding to AM discrimination), no
correlation between the 2 Hz EFR and the psychoacoustic thresholds were found. The
128 Hz EFR, however, revealed a positive correlation with the psychoacoustic thresholds
==PAGE:27==
4.5 Examination of EFRs
20
at ms = 40 % (r = 0.5, p = 0.041). This implies that a stronger 128 Hz EFR results in
a higher threshold of AM discrimination.
Correlation coeﬀicients between SRT measures and 2 Hz and 128 Hz EFRs at a 100 %
AM target depth for both standard depths were not statistical significant (p > 0.05).
4.5
Examination of EFRs
During the analysis it was found that the elderly group had significantly weakened EFRs
to the 128 Hz AM rate in the brainstem. Altered activity in the cortex, has earlier
been found to be consequence of deficits in AM coding in the ANFs [42]. Relations
between responses in the auditory cortex in absence of ANFs has been studied in mice
by Chambers et al. 2016. [43]. They found that responses from the auditory cortex were
elevated in the absence of ANFs. She suggests that a central gain mechanism is apparent
in the auditory cortex when the response from ANFs is weakened. In this study it was
found that although the AM coding in the brainstem was weaker in the elderly group,
they obtained similar responses to the 2 Hz alternation rate from the cortex, compared
to the young adult. It has earlier been found that neural responses to slow rate AM are
less sinusoidal for elderly people [44]. This might be apparent in the harmonics of the
2 Hz EFR.
To investigate this further, we looked at the relation between the 2 Hz, 4 Hz and
128 Hz EFR at the ms = 0 % standard AM depth, as the 2 Hz and 128 Hz EFRs showed
greatest differences for this condition. Similar to the other EFR rates, the 4 Hz EFR for
all subjects showed a growth (r = 0.7), but it was far more significant (p = 3.66e-9).
The SNR of the 4 Hz and 128 Hz EFR rates were tested in a two-way ANOVA to
check for interaction effects between the age group and EFR frequency. For ms = 0 %
a significant difference between the 4 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (F(1,32) = 5.83, p =
0.0217) was found, as well as a highly significant interaction effect between the age group
and the EFR rate (F(1,32) = 12.53, p = 0.0012). This implies that the difference between
the strength of the two EFR rates is much higher for the young adults compared to the
elderly group. No significant differences was found between the young and elderly group
(F(1,32) = 3.44, p = 0.0731) . The difference in the two groups for the 2 Hz, 128 Hz and
4 Hz EFRs at a target depth of 100 % and ms = 0 % is shown in Figure 4.5.
==PAGE:28==
4.5 Examination of EFRs
21
Figure 4.5: Violin plot of the 2 Hz, 128 Hz and 4 Hz EFRs at ms = 0 % for the young
adults and elderly group. The significance bars between the EFR groups
indicates statistical significance of the interaction between age and EFR
rate while the significance bars within each rate indicates the statistical
significance between age groups for that rate. ∗∗= p < 0.01 [3].
As an interaction effect was found for both 2 Hz and 4 Hz EFRs when compared
against the 128 Hz EFR rate, it is interesting to take a look at the correlates between
the 128 Hz EFR measured in the brainstem and the 2 Hz and 4 Hz EFRs measured in
the cortex. These are shown in Figure 4.6. As seen in the left plot, a significant positive
correlation was found between the 2 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (r = 0.67, p = 0.0022).
The correlation of these rates was also made individually for the young and the elderly
group. The elderly group showed a strong positive correlation (r = 0.94, p = 6.1e-5)
and so did the group of young adults (r = 0.86, p = 0.0065). The two groups had a
significant offset in the correlation, which was found in the interaction of the ANOVA.
==PAGE:29==
4.5 Examination of EFRs
22
Figure 4.6: Correlates between the 2 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (left), and between
the 4 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (right). The blue points are elderly
subjects whereas the young adults are marked with red. The dotted lines
indicates the 95 % confidence interval for the predicted value of the linear
regressions. In the left plot, the r and p values is shown for individual
correlates of the two groups.
The correlation between the 4 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR (right plot) was not
significant, but interestingly r = 0.31, which means that there was a tendency towards
a stronger 4 Hz EFR when the 128 Hz EFR was weaker.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Psychoacoustic experiments
In this study, relations between electrophysiological and psychoacoustic measures of
temporal processing were investigated.
It was hypothesized that elderly people had
higher thresholds for both psychoacoustic AM detection and discrimination tasks. The
latter was found by Regev et al. 2020 [24]. However, no significant differences between
the two groups was found in this study. The paradigm of this study is different from
others in that the stimulus alternates between the target AM depth and the reference AM
depth. The perceived difference of the intervals in the psychoacoustic experiment is the
slow alternation in depth rather than the fast AM. The elderly group had significantly
reduced responses to the fast AM. However, the reduced coding of the fast AM in sub-
cortical stages might be compensated for in cortical stages as is suggested for speech
comprehension [42]. This could explain why the alternation rate is perceived similarly
in the two groups although the elderly had reduced sub-cortical responses. Other reasons
are that only one training round was completed prior to the experiment. Hence, there
might be a considerable difference in how trained the subjects were. Five out of ten in
the elderly group were musicians which might have had an impact on the results.
No differences in SRTs between the two groups were observed even though the elderly
group had significantly worse EFRs to the 128 Hz AM rate, which indicates worse AM
coding in the brainstem. Schoof et al. 2014 [45], who found higher SRTs for elderly in
multi-talker babble (i.e. informational masking), did not find any effect of age for SRTs
in stationary or modulated noise, which complies with results of this study. Peelle et
al. 2016 [42] suggests that the cortex of elderly people compensates altered temporal
processing and that performance in acoustical diﬀicult environments is similar to that
of young people, but listening effort is higher and words or stories are memorized worse.
It has also been shown that musical training has a great impact on speech perception
[46], and hence the five musicians in the elderly group might benefit from this.
5.2
EEG measures
EFRs were measured as function of target AM depth for standard AM depths of ms = 0 %
and ms = 40 %. For both standard depths, the growth of the response with increases in
depth difference was higher for the 2 Hz EFR (r=0.4 & r=0.56) compared to the 128 Hz
EFR (r=0.34 & r=0.11). The growth difference between the two rates was particularly
==PAGE:31==
5.3 Correlation of physiological and behavioral measures of AM coding
24
prominent for the ms = 40 % modulated standard (r=0.56 for 2 Hz and r=0.11 for
128 Hz). This implies that the paradigm of the electrophysiological experiment works as
exclusively changing the 128 Hz AM depth in the target intervals causes stronger effect
on the 2 Hz EFR compared to the 128 Hz EFR.
For the unmodulated standard (ms = 0 %), and a fully modulated target AM (depth
of 100 %), a significant difference in the 128 EFR between the two groups were found.
This was also found by Purcell et al. 2004 [47] for EFRs above 100 Hz. Purcell sug-
gests that EFRs at these rates reflects the temporal acuity of the aging nervous system.
Shaheen et al. 2015 [48] found that noise-induced cochlear neuropathy highly reduced
EFRs in mice, while Wu et al. 2019 [17] found that ANFs degenerates with age in human.
Hence, the reduced 128 Hz EFRs in the elderly group supports that they could suffer
from cochlear neuropathy to some degree.
At the most shallow target depth for both standards, a greater proportion of subjects
had significant responses for the 128 Hz EFR compared to the 2 Hz EFR. This implies
that the 128 Hz EFR is apparent at the brainstem but that the 2 Hz alternation between
the target intervals and standard intervals is not clearly resolved by the EEG. It was
hypothesized that the alternation rate would be apparent in the 2 Hz EFR if it was
resolved perceptually since decision mechanisms lies within the auditory cortex [25]. If
the hypothesis holds true, the slow alternation of the AM depth is not perceived at
the most shallow target depth when the stimulus is ongoing rather than short as in the
psychoacoustic experiment. Other possible explanations is that internal noise [33] in the
cortex dominates the alternation rate or that measurement noise exceeds the 2 Hz EFR.
5.3
Correlation of physiological and
behavioral measures of AM coding
The EFRs to the fully modulated targets (100 % depth) at standard depths of ms = 0 %
and ms = 40 % were correlated with psychoacoustic thresholds measured at the same
standard AM. A negative correlation between the 2 Hz EFR and the psychoacoustic
thresholds were found for the unmodulated standard AM depth (ms = 0 %). This means
that subjects who achieved better thresholds in the psychoacoustic AM detection task
(ms = 0 %), did also have stronger responses to the alternation rate between the target
and standard intervals. This correlation occurred although the EFRs were measured at
a target AM depth of 100 % while the mean thresholds of the psychoacoustic experiment
for ms = 0 % were 39.5 %. The same pattern was found for the 128 Hz EFR rate, but it
was not significant. This implies that the the alternation of AM depth elicit a cortical
readout of the decision processes that is better correlated with the behavioral threshold
than the sub-cortical EFR to the fast AM.
No correlation was found between the 2 Hz EFRs and the psychoacoustic thresholds
at a standard AM depth of ms = 40 %, but a significant positive correlation between
the 128 Hz EFRs and the psychoacoustic thresholds was found. This is opposite of the
==PAGE:32==
5.4 Examination of EFRs
25
pattern observed for a standard AM depth of ms = 0 %. It implies that a strong coding of
the 128 Hz EFR leads to a worse AM discrimination thresholds. This is counter-intuitive,
as one would expect a strong AM coding to result in better AM discrimination thresholds.
A possible explanation is that those who have a strong 128 Hz EFR response at a target
AM depth of 100 % do also have a strong AM coding at the standard AM depth of 40 %.
Hence, if one has a strong coding of the standard AM depth itself, a higher difference
between the standard AM depth and the target AM depth might be needed in order
to recognise the 2 Hz alternation rate of the stimulus in the psychoacoustic experiment.
This implies that the strength of the sub-cortical EFR does not necessarily reflect the
ability to detect differences in AM depths. A possible cortical compensation for reduced
AM coding [44], could have great effect on the identification of the 2 Hz alternation rate.
The sub-cortical EFR to the fast rate is independent of the standard AM depth. Hence,
a readout related to difference in AM depth, that the behavioral task relies on, is needed.
Another explanation for the positive correlation is that the elderly group, in which 5/10
were musicians, have weakened 128 Hz EFRs but low discrimination thresholds due to
musical training.
5.4
Examination of EFRs
Correlates between the EFRs at a standard AM depth of ms = 0 % were investigated. A
significant positive correlation between the 2 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR at was found
for the unmodulated standard. This seems logical as both of these EFRs correlates
negatively with the psychoacoustic AM thresholds at ms = 0 %.
This means that
a strong AM coding, leads to a strong neural response to the alternation rate in the
auditory cortex, which is revealed by lower psychoacoustic AM detection thresholds due
to better perception of the alternation rate.
The two groups had an offset in the correlates between 2 Hz and 128 Hz EFRs,
as was seen in Figure 4.6. The offset shows that elderly subjects have a higher ratio
between the cortical EFRs and sub-cortical EFRs compared to the group of young
adults. This indicates the deficits of the AM coding in the brainstem is compensated for
in the auditory cortex. Particularly the EFR to the 2 Hz alternation rate is apparent at
smaller 128 Hz EFRs compared to the young adults. This implies that the compensatory
plasticity of the auditory cortex found in mice (Chambers et al 2016 [43]), is also apparent
in human with damaged ANFs.
The correlation between the 4 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR were non-significant.
However, the highly significant interaction effect between these EFRs and the age group
shows that the ratio between the 4 Hz EFR and the 128 Hz EFR is much higher for
the elderly group. It has earlier been found that neural responses to AM at slow rates
are less sinusoidal for elderly people [44]. This is supported by a stronger 4 Hz EFR
(harmonic to the 2 Hz) compared to the 128 Hz EFR for the elderly group.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
1. In this study a novel EEG paradigm with nested AM rates was used to create a
readout related to behavioral discrimination of AM depth. A 128 Hz modulated
broad-band noise stimulus that alternated between reference intervals and target
intervals of increased AM depth at 2 Hz was used to evoke cortical (2 Hz) and
sub-cortical (128 Hz) EFRs. The paradigm worked, in that changing the 128 Hz
AM depth had a greater impact on the growth of the cortical EFRs compared to
the sub-cortical EFRs.
2. No difference in behavioral AM detection and discrimination tasks were found
between the two groups. Possible reasons why the results differs from earlier studies
on AM discrimination is musical training within the elderly group, training effects,
or the paradigm, in which the perceived difference between the three intervals
of alternating stimuli, is the alternation rate rather than the AM rate. Hence
plasticity of the auditory cortex might compensate for worsened AM coding in the
brainstem. Another reason could be training effects.
3. Speech-in-noise perception measured with SRTs did not show any differences be-
tween the two groups, and neither did the correlates of SRTs and EEG measures.
4. The group of young adults obtained significantly higher EFRs to the 128 Hz AM
rate, which indicates that AM coding in the brainstem declines with age.
5. For AM detection (ms = 0 %) the psychoacoustic thresholds correlated negatively
with 2 Hz EFRs in response to target intervals of 100 % AM depth at standard
AM depth of ms = 0 %. This implies that the cortical 2 Hz EFR can be directly
compared to the perception of the alternation between the intervals.
6. Correlates between EEG and psychoacoustic thresholds suggested that stronger
EFR of the 128 Hz rate led to a lower threshold for AM detection (unmodulated
standard), while it led to a higher threshold for AM discrimination (modulated
standard). This could be due to cortical compensation for damaged ANFs, which
might have bigger impact on the perception of the 2 Hz alternation rate rather
than the 128 Hz AM rate, or simply a training effect for elderly subjects, who had
significantly lower 128 Hz EFRs.
7. Correlates between cortical 2 Hz EFRs and sub-cortical 128 Hz EFRs revealed a
strong correlation between the two. However, an interaction effect between age
group and the two EFR rates revealed that the ratio between cortical EFRs and
==PAGE:34==
6 Conclusion
27
the sub-cortical EFRs was higher for the elderly group. The same interaction effect
was found for the 4 Hz EFR (harmonic of the 2 Hz EFR). This implies that the
absence of sub-cortical AM coding is compensated for in the auditory cortex.
==PAGE:35==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Scatter plot of the behavioral thresholds and SRTs. The lines indicates lin-
ear regressions. Thresh0 is the behavioral threshold at ms = 0 %, Thresh20
at ms = 20 % and so forth.
==PAGE:36==
A Appendix
29
Figure A.2: Psychometric functions fitted to the mean of the hit rate of the oddballs
for each condition. The blue lines indicates the mean of the elderly group
whereas the red lines indicates the mean of the young adults. The trans-
parent markers illustrates the standard deviation for each group. The top
row shows the conditions where ms = 0 % and the bottom row where
ms = 40 %.
==PAGE:37==
A Appendix
30
Figure A.3: Topography of the mean 2 Hz EFR at condition 3 (ms = 0 %,
mtot = 100 %) for elderly and young adults.
Figure A.4: Topography of the mean 128 Hz EFR at condition 3 (ms = 0 %,
mtot = 100 %) for elderly and young adults.
==PAGE:38==
Bibliography
[1]
Stephan D. Ewert and Torsten Dau. Characterizing frequency selectivity for enve-
lope fluctuations. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 108(3):1181,
2000.
[2]
Terence W Picton. Human auditory evoked potentials. Plural Publishing, 2010.
[3]
Bastian Bechtold, Patrick Fletcher, Seamusholden, and Srinivas Gorur-Shandilya.
bastibe/Violinplot-Matlab: A Good Starting Point, feb 2021.
[4]
Rohima Badri, Jonathan H. Siegel, and Beverly A. Wright. Auditory filter shapes
and high-frequency hearing in adults who have impaired speech in noise performance
despite clinically normal audiograms.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 129(2):852–863, 2011.
[5]
Judy R. Dubno, Donald D. Dirks, and Donald E. Morgan. Effects of age and mild
hearing loss on speech recognition in noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 76(1):87–96, 1984.
[6]
Anne Strouse, Daniel H. Ashmead, Ralph N. Ohde, and D. Wesley Grantham.
Temporal processing in the aging auditory system. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 104(4):2385–2399, 1998.
[7]
Robert V Shannon, Fan-gang Zeng, Vivek Kamath, John Wygonski, and Michael
Ekelid. Temporal Cues. Science, 270(5234):303–304, 2007.
[8]
Nirmal Kumar Srinivasan and Pavel Zahorik. Enhancement of speech intelligibility
in reverberant rooms: Role of amplitude envelope and temporal fine structure. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 135(6):EL239–EL245, 2014.
[9]
Karen B. Snell and D. Robert Frisina. Relationships among age-related differences
in gap detection and word recognition. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 107(3):1615–1626, 2000.
[10] Nicolas Wallaert, Brian C. J. Moore, and Christian Lorenzi. Comparing the effects
of age on amplitude modulation and frequency modulation detection. The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 139(6):3088–3096, 2016.
[11] Josef Schlittenlacher and Brian C. J. Moore.
Discrimination of amplitude-
modulation depth by subjects with normal and impaired hearing.
The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 140(5):3487–3495, 2016.
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
32
[12] Brian C.J. Moore, Sashi Mariathasan, and Aleksander P. Se￿k. Effects of Age and
Hearing Loss on the Discrimination of Amplitude and Frequency Modulation for 2-
and 10-Hz Rates. Trends in Hearing, 23:1–12, 2019.
[13] Terence W. Picton, M. Sasha John, Andrew Dimitrijevic, and David Purcell. Hu-
man auditory steady-state responses. International Journal of Audiology, 42(4):177–
219, 2003.
[14] Terence W. Picton, Christopher R. Skinner, Sandra C. Champagne, Adrian J.C.
Kellett, and Anita C. Maiste. Potentials evoked by the sinusoidal modulation of
the amplitude or frequency of a tone. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
82(1):165–178, 1987.
[15] Gavin M. Bidelman, Joshua W. Villafuerte, Sylvain Moreno, and Claude Alain.
Age-related changes in the subcortical-cortical encoding and categorical perception
of speech. Neurobiology of Aging, 35(11):2526–2540, 2014.
[16] Robin Gransier, Michael Hofmann, Astrid van Wieringen, and Jan Wouters.
Stimulus-evoked phase-locked activity along the human auditory pathway strongly
varies across individuals. Scientific Reports, 11(1):1–13, 2021.
[17] P. Z. Wu, L. D. Liberman, K. Bennett, V. de Gruttola, J. T. O’Malley, and M. C.
Liberman.
Primary Neural Degeneration in the Human Cochlea: Evidence for
Hidden Hearing Loss in the Aging Ear. Neuroscience, 407:8–20, 2019.
[18] Lucas M. Viana, Jennifer T. O’Malley, Barbara J. Burgess, Dianne D. Jones, Car-
los A.C.P. Oliveira, Felipe Santos, Saumil N. Merchant, Leslie D. Liberman, and
M. Charles Liberman. Cochlear neuropathy in human presbycusis: Confocal anal-
ysis of hidden hearing loss in post-mortem tissue. Hearing Research, 327:78–88,
2015.
[19] Hari M. Bharadwaj, Sarah Verhulst, Luke Shaheen, M. Charles Liberman, and
Barbara G. Shinn-Cunningham.
Cochlear neuropathy and the coding of supra-
threshold sound. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 8(FEB), 2014.
[20] Hari M. Bharadwaj, Salwa Masud, Golbarg Mehraei, Sarah Verhulst, and Bar-
bara G. Shinn-Cunningham. Individual differences reveal correlates of hidden hear-
ing deficits. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(5):2161–2172, 2015.
[21] M. Charles Liberman.
Auditory-nerve response from cats raised in a low-noise
chamber. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 63(2):442–455, 1978.
[22] Adam C. Furman, Sharon G. Kujawa, and M. Charles Liberman. Noise-induced
cochlear neuropathy is selective for fibers with low spontaneous rates. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 110(3):577–586, 2013.
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
33
[23] Harrison W. Lin, Adam C. Furman, Sharon G. Kujawa, and M. Charles Liberman.
Primary neural degeneration in the guinea pig cochlea after reversible noise-induced
threshold shift. JARO - Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology,
12(5):605–616, 2011.
[24] J. Regev, P.A. Mesiano, J. Zaar, and T. Dau (2020). Characterizing comodulation
masking release in hearing-impaired listeners. In poster PS513, presented at the
43rd ARO MidWinter Meeting, San Jose, USA, 2020.
[25] Jeffrey R. Binder, Einat Liebenthal, Edward T. Possing, David A. Medler, and
B. Douglas Ward. Neural correlates of sensory and decision processes in auditory
object identification. Nature Neuroscience, 7(3):295–301, 2004.
[26] Christian Füllgrabe, Brian C.J. Moore, and Michael A. Stone. Age-group differences
in speech identification despite matched audiometrically normal hearing: Contribu-
tions from auditory temporal processing and cognition. Frontiers in Aging Neuro-
science, 7(JAN):1–25, 2015.
[27] Venugopal Manju, Kizhakke Kodiyath Gopika, and Pitchai Muthu Arivudai Nambi.
Association of Auditory Steady State Responses with Perception of Temporal Mod-
ulations and Speech in Noise. ISRN Otolaryngology, 2014:1–8, 2014.
[28] Nanna Haug Hilton, Anja Schüppert, and Charlotte Gooskens. Syllable reduction
and articulation rates in Danish, Norwegian and Swedish. Nordic Journal of Lin-
guistics, 34(2):215–237, 2011.
[29] Suzana Herculano-Houzel.
The human brain in numbers: A linearly scaled-up
primate brain. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 3(NOV):1–11, 2009.
[30] Michael X. Cohen. Where Does EEG Come From and What Does It Mean? Trends
in Neurosciences, 40(4):208–218, 2017.
[31] Anne Lise Giraud, Christian Lorenzi, John Ashburner, Jocelyne Wable, Ingrid
Johnsrude, Richard Frackowiak, and Andreas Kleinschmidt.
Representation of
the temporal envelope of sounds in the human brain. Journal of Neurophysiology,
84(3):1588–1598, 2000.
[32] Emma Holmes, David W. Purcell, Robert P. Carlyon, Hedwig E. Gockel, and In-
grid S. Johnsrude.
Attentional Modulation of Envelope-Following Responses at
Lower (93–109 Hz) but Not Higher (217–233 Hz) Modulation Rates. JARO - Jour-
nal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 19(1):83–97, 2018.
[33] Stephan D. Ewert and Torsten Dau. External and internal limitations in amplitude-
modulation processing.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
116(1):478–490, 2004.
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
34
[34] Markus Garrett and S. Verhulst. Applicability of subcortical EEG metrics of synap-
topathy to older listeners with impaired audiograms. Hearing Research, 380:150–165,
2019.
[35] Shaum P Bhagat and Craig A Champlin. Effect of frequency region and noise band-
width on the amfr. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 108(5):2596–
2597, 2000.
[36] H. Levitt. Transformed Up‐Down Methods in Psychoacoustics. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 49(2B):467–477, 1971.
[37] Jens Bo Nielsen and Torsten Dau. The Danish hearing in noise test. International
Journal of Audiology, 50(3):202–208, 2011.
[38] Robert Oostenveld, Pascal Fries, Eric Maris, and Jan-Mathijs Schoffelen. FieldTrip:
Open Source Software for Advanced Analysis of MEG, EEG, and Invasive Elec-
trophysiological Data. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 2011:156869,
2011.
[39] Noisetools toolbox. http://audition.ens.fr/adc/NoiseTools/. Accessed: 2021-
04-30.
[40] M. Sasha John, Andrew Dimitrijevic, and Terence W. Picton. Weighted averaging
of steady-state responses. Clinical Neurophysiology, 112(3):555–562, 2001.
[41] Robert A. Dobie and Michael J. Wilson.
A comparison of t test, F test, and
coherence methods of detecting steady‐state auditory‐evoked potentials, distor-
tion‐product otoacoustic emissions, or other sinusoids . The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America, 100(4):2236–2246, 1996.
[42] Jonathan E. Peelle and Arthur Wingfield. The Neural Consequences of Age-Related
Hearing Loss. Trends in Neurosciences, 39(7):486–497, 2016.
[43] Anna R. Chambers, Jennifer Resnik, Yasheng Yuan, Jonathon P. Whitton, Albert S.
Edge, M. Charles Liberman, and Daniel B. Polley. Central Gain Restores Auditory
Processing following Near-Complete Cochlear Denervation. Neuron, 89(4):867–879,
2016.
[44] Vanessa C Irsik, Ala Almanaseer, Ingrid S Johnsrude, and Björn Herrmann. Cor-
tical responses to the amplitude envelopes of sounds change with age. Journal of
Neuroscience, 41(23):5045–5055, 2021.
[45] Tim Schoof and Stuart Rosen. The role of auditory and cognitive factors in un-
derstanding speech in noise by normal-hearing older listeners. Frontiers in Aging
Neuroscience, 6(OCT):1–14, 2014.
[46] Chandni Jain, Hijas Mohamed, and Ajith Kumar U. The Effect of Short-Term
Musical Training on Speech Perception in Noise.
Audiology Research, 5(1):5–8,
2015.
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
35
[47] David W. Purcell, Sasha M. John, Bruce A. Schneider, and Terence W. Picton.
Human temporal auditory acuity as assessed by envelope following responses. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 116(6):3581–3593, 2004.
[48] Luke A. Shaheen, Michelle D. Valero, and M. Charles Liberman. Towards a Diag-
nosis of Cochlear Neuropathy with Envelope Following Responses. JARO - Journal
of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 16(6):727–745, 2015.
